Beta risk is the one risk factor you don't
want to be overly exposed to in this kind
of environment.
The reason GDP growth is so slow, the reason
productivity growth is so slow at the moment,
is because we are at the end of a debt super
cycle.
I know you would like to ask me the question
how could I be wrong.
But I can guarantee you that these mega-trends
will unfold.
I'm a Danish National.
Came home to my wife one spring day in 1986.
I said to her, would you like to move to London?
I've been offered a very interesting job.
That's now 31 years ago.
So we have now spent-- we are, for all intents
and purposes, British nationals, but obviously
with strong Danish roots.
I have work mostly for American investment
banks.
I worked for Goldman Sachs for many years.
I ended up at Lehman Brothers, heading up
the private wealth management division in
Europe.
Then in 2002 I decided to start my own business,
which is now into 17, 18 years.
That business was mostly in multi-family office
business, but gradually-- especially after
the financial crisis in 2008-- we have increasingly
become institutional.
And today the biggest client base for our
business today is the UK corporates pension
fund base.
The end game could unfold in a number of different
ways.
But let me back up before we get to the end
game.
Let me explain why I think the world has changed
quite dramatically in recent years.
The typical investor today doesn't really
care about the long-term.
For most investors, long-term means next Monday
morning and not next year or the year after.
And therefore, some of the longer term structural
trends that I have focused on in my book are
being largely ignored and neglected by investors.
And that's actually an opportunity set for
those investors who are prepared to dig a
little bit deeper and prepared to structure
their portfolio according to what is going
to unfold over the next 10, 20, 30 years.
The end game can unfold in a number of different
ways.
If you go back to one of the six structured
mega-trends that I discussed in the book,
it's what I call the end of the debt super
cycle.
The last debt super cycle ended in the 1940s--
late '30s, early '40s.
And that basically reset the clock.
Debt to GDP has been rising constantly since
1946.
And I'm arguing in my book that we are now
approaching the end of the current debt super
cycle.
If you go back in history to 300, 400 years,
you can find a number of debt super cycles.
It's not an unknown phenomenon.
We typically build up debt, something happens,
everything collapses, and we start all over
again.
And that's precisely what we are at now.
We are at the tail end of the current debt
super cycle.
That, combined with a number of other factors,
will potentially end up in what I call the
perfect storm-- a prolonged period of low
GDP growth, low returns on equities.
And for that reason investors need to think
fundamentally differently in terms of how
they structure their portfolios for many years
to come.
The way I structure portfolios, first of all,
it is quite different from the way most people
do it.
Most people think of portfolio construction
as how much do I allocate to equities, how
much to allocate to bonds.
They think of asset classes when they talk
to their portfolios.
I don't think of asset classes.
I think of risk pockets.
I operate with four risk pockets-- beta risk,
alpha risk, credit risk, and gamma risk.
And gamma risk is basically everything else.
And what I think is important for investors
to understand is that if the six structured
mega-trends unfurled the way I think they
will over the next several years, the worst
pockets you can invest in is the beta pocket.
Beta risk is the one risk factor you don't
want to be overly exposed to in this kind
of environment.
However, the vast majority of investors are
more exposed to the beta pocket than to any
of the other pockets that I just mentioned.
And therefore, you need to think very, very
differently about portfolio construction when
you take this into consideration.
When you invest passively, you basically are
exposed to what I call the beta factor.
Do markets go up or do they go down or do
they stay flat?
The great advantage of investing passively
is really to reduce your cost on a pre-cost
basis.
Active managers don't underperform.
That's a myth and it's a complete untruth.
Active investors on a pre-cost basis perform
in line with the market, because they are
the market.
After costs, they underperform because costs
to active managers-- it's a significant factor
in when you calculate total performance.
When you invest passively, you obviously reduce
your costs significantly.
And therefore, more and more investors have
decided to invest passively.
Because that way they can perform more closely
in line with the market.
Passive investing-- you will basically buy
the market.
If the market goes up, the weight has gone
up the last 30 years-- about 10%, 11% a year--
you will be fine.
But markets will not go up 10% or 11% per
year over the next 20, 30 years.
Markets will go up a fraction of that, if
at all.
I reckon that a global equity portfolio over
the next 20, 30 years would probably do pretty
much a zero return-- maybe a very, very modest
positive return.
So anywhere between 0% and 3%, which basically
means that if you invest passively that's
all you can hope for.
If you invest in some of the strategies that
I will come back to later, you can improve
those kind of returns significantly.
We are six years into the current debt super
cycle.
We are coming to the very end of this.
The reason GDP growth is so slow, the reason
productivity growth is so slow at the moment,
is because we are at the end of the debt super
cycle.
Because the closer we get to the end, the
more indebted the world is.
The more capital is used to service existing
capital, to service the existing debt, I should
say.
And therefore, instead of using the capital
we have at our disposal for productivity enhancing
purposes, we use debt to service existing
debt.
And that obviously cuts back on productivity
growth.
The second one, and probably the biggest one,
is the retirement of the baby boomers.
Baby boomers are those who were born between
1945 and the early 1960s.
The baby boomers have now started to retire
in large numbers.
And when baby boomers retire, you obviously
reduce the size of the workforce.
And when you reduce the size of the workforce,
you reduce economic growth.
I'm probably mostly worried about the retirement
of the baby boomers, and let me tell you why.
Economic growth, GDP growth, is a must in
a world that is as indebted as the world is
today.
And with declining workforce for many years
to come, we know that economic growth will
be very, very pedestrian.
We know that the European workforce will decline
by about 0.6% per annum, which basically means
that unless productivity grows by at least
0.6% per annum, we also had negative GDP growth
in the eurozone.
The US is by far the least impacted market
by this factor.
The US workforce will continue to grow by
about a quarter of a percent per year.
The third factor of my six structural mega-trends
is what I call the declining spending power
of the middle classes.
Vast centers of the Western world's population
has seen a flattening, or even worse, decline
in spending power over the last few years.
It started in America.
The Americans saw a decline in spending power.
Then it moved to Europe.
And the countries mostly affected in Europe
over the past 10 years is the UK and Italy.
And obviously when the spending power is reduced,
economic growth declines.
And there's absolutely nothing on the near
term horizon that suggests that the spending
power will improve anytime soon.
The fourth mega-trend that I have focused
on in my book is what I call the rise of the
East.
But I'm less convinced that the rise of the
East will actually lead to a decline of the
West.
It could lead to a decline of the West, but
probably only in relative terms.
As living standards improve in the East, as
people start to spend more money, looking
for good returns on the capital will increasingly
look to the East for new opportunities.
And therefore, more and more capital will
seek to escape from the west and look to the
East for the opportunity set that is now being
offered over there.
And therefore, even if it doesn't have a major
effect on GDP growth in the West that the
East is rising, then it will definitely have
an effect on the capital at our disposal.
And that will affect productivity and GDP
growth.
Another structural mega-trend that I have
discussed in the book is what I called the
death of fossil fuels.
There is a very strong desire to electrify
everything we do-- electrify transportation,
electrify heating our homes, electrify everything.
And the death of fossil fuels is really a
consequence of that other trend.
Alternative energy forms are increasingly
on the agenda for governments around the world.
And alternative energy forms are perfect for
electrification.
And that will drive a even stronger need and
desire to increase electrification.
And that will basically kill the need for
fossil fuels.
But let me back up on that for a second.
Fossil fuels won't die completely.
Oil won't disappear, at least not in our lifetime.
And the reason for that is the need for oil
in the chemical industry.
My last structural mega-trend is what I called
mean reversion of wealth to GDP.
Wealth to GDP is a macroeconomic identity
that many people are way off.
Wealth to GDP in society all over the world,
is relatively constant.
Wealth is basically the sum of all households.
And the three big drivers of wealth in households
are property, equities, and bonds.
And total wealth to GDP in society, as I said
before, it's long-term constant.
However, since the great financial crisis
where wealth the GDP came back to its long-term
mean value, wealth to GDP has escalated out
of control, so to speak.
Today in the US, where wealth to GDP is about
3.75 times-- in other words, wealth is 3.75
times higher than GDP-- now, as of today,
the number is about five times.
So one could argue that wealth in the US would
have to come back by about 25% to 30% in order
to get back to the levels that will re-establish
the long-term mean value.
If you go back-- if you think about the logic
behind this, it's actually quite simple.
Think of wealth as capital, and think of GDP
as output.
Wealth to GDP is then capital to output.
In other words, how much capital does it take
to generate one unit of GDP?
And the wealth to GDP ratio then becomes a
capital efficiency ratio.
In other words, if the wealth to GDP ratio
in the US is lower than it is in Europe, it
basically means that capital efficiency in
the US is better than it is in Europe.
However, all over the world we are now above
the long-term mean, which basically means
that either property, equities, or bonds,
or a combination of the three will have to
come down in years to come.
Think about how they interact with each other.
One could argue that the last one-- the minimum
version of GDP-- is actually the end game
of the combination of all the other mega-trends
It's a little bit different.
It's not necessarily a trend.
It's potentially more of an outcome that is
of a result of the retirement of the baby
boomers, the end of the debt super cycle,
et cetera.
And therefore, I categorize the mean reversion
idea or trend a little bit differently than
I do the other ones.
I'm probably more worried about people not
paying any attention to this than anything
else.
I'm staggered, to tell you the truth, how
ill informed many investors are about these
trends.
They are all literally set in stone.
I know you would like to ask me the question
how could I be wrong, but I can guarantee
you that these mega-trends will unfold.
It's just a question of time.
I don't issue many guarantees.
My compliance manager will tell me that I'm
not allowed to issue guarantees.
But when it comes to structural trends, it's
pretty much a given that they will unfold.
And therefore, it's staggering how little
attention people pay to it.
The retirement of the baby boomers-- one could
argue that we could relatively easily fix
that problem.
I would be very surprised if any country around
the world is prepared to go in the footsteps
of Angela Merkel and do what she did last
year or a year before.
To tell you the truth, they could fix an awful
lot of problems for an awful lot of countries
if we let in more immigrants.
But there's no appetite for that at the moment.
In terms of women joining the workforce, the
numbers just don't add up.
When we get to a ratio of women to men in
the workforce, in the active workforce of
about 9 to 10-- so for every 10 men, we have
nine women-- the numbers flatten.
The first countries in the world that reached
this level of 9 to 10 was the three Scandinavian
countries and Holland.
And in all four countries the numbers have
flattened since it doesn't go any further.
So don't ever assume that for every 10 men
in the workforce will have 10 women.
It just doesn't happen.
And therefore, if you look at where we are
in other OECD countries around the world now,
we are so close to the 0.9 number, that you
can't expect anything meaningful to happen
on that front.
The only country that is significantly away
from 0.9 is Japan.
Japan is at 0.7.
So for every 10 men in the Japanese workforce,
you only have seven women.
But having said that, if you then dig a little
bit deeper again and look at the Japanese
workforce, you will find that women under
40 are at 0.9.
Only women above 40 are at 0.7, which basically
means that you would have to persuade the
oldest Japanese women to join the workforce.
And that is not very likely to happen.
The Americans have something that we didn't
really have in Europe, called echo boomers.
The echo boomers are the children of the baby
boomers.
And for that reason, when we get to the mid
2020s-- so seven, eight years from now, nine
years from now-- the GDP growth rate in the
US will start to pick up again.
Because the echo boomers will start to kick
in.
In Europe, that won't happen.
And therefore, the slow economic growth that
I'm predicting for Europe will last at least
to 2050.
It will fix a few things.
Problem number one, people don't want to work
till they are 75 or 80.
Working until they're 69 or 70 is not going
to fix many problems.
I know in Denmark, my home country, the unions
are having a mega-fight with the government
at the moment, trying to persuade the government
that don't take away from our members what
they have earned over a lifetime.
This is something they have earned over many,
many years.
And they are entitled to retire when they're
65.
Don't touch that.
And that is an argument that you hear again
and again and again, not only in Denmark,
but all over the place.
So that's the first problem.
The second problem is that old people are
not as productive as young people are.
Productivity peaks when people in their '30s.
Then it stays relatively flat for about 10
to 15 years.
But when people reach their mid '50s, productivity
growth goes on a steep decline.
And by the time they are 65 or 70, they are
significantly less productive than they are
when they are at their best.
So how long could this take before it all
unfolds, before it all and unravels?
The true answer is, that nobody knows.
The pension industry in the Western world
is divided up between defined benefits and
defined contributions.
In many countries around the world, defined
benefits still account for a very significant
proportion of total pension plans.
In the UK, as an example, we have-- between
state pensions, local authority pensions,
and corporate pensions, the three main components
of pension plans here in the UK-- we have
10 trillion pounds of unfunded pension schemes,
which is basically between five and six times
UK GDP.
Unless interest rates start to rise meaningfully,
the UK DB pension model will collapse at some
point.
Given the enormous amount of unfunded pensions,
I would say within the next five to 10 years.
So could we survive not with GDP growth, but
with GDP being relatively stable?
I would like to offer two answers to that
question.
Extreme amounts of indebtedness in the Anglo-Saxon
world, the lack of pension schemes amongst
many citizens in the Anglo-Saxon world, requires
for GDP to grow unless the ship will definitely
sink.
In the other parts of the world-- take Germany,
where personal savings are extraordinary solid
and robust-- I don't think we need GDP growth.
The view in my family is that yes, we will
definitely survive without GDP growth as long
as we can protect what we already have.
We don't need to improve things.
But I'm sure you can find millions of people
around the world who wouldn't subscribe to
that view.
And therefore, there are different answers
to that question depending on which part of
the world you live in and how indebted you
are.
So what should investors really invest in,
given what we have just talked about?
Let me go back to the for risk pockets that
I mentioned much earlier-- beta risk, alpha
risk, credit risk, and gamma risk.
If I'm just about right that global equities
in the years to come will deliver no more
than low single digit returns, the one risk
pocket you want to be overly exposed to is
the beta risk pocket.
And that is, as I said earlier, that is the
one risk pocket that everybody is exposed
to at the moment.
But let's start with a plain, vanilla investor.
Let's start with the investor who tends to
invest in only bonds and equities.
Bonds, I don't think, belong in my portfolio
to any significant degree.
Bonds will deliver at best, zero returns.
At worst, modest negative returns.
I think interest rates will rise very modestly
in the years to come, but not at all as dramatic
as some people talk about.
If I'm right that interest rates stay low
for many years to come, investors will increasingly
look for income in equities.
And therefore, you should look at income equities
as an alternative to true growth equities.
But let me put a warning flag in the ground
right now.
A lot of companies pay income without being
able to afford it.
A lot of companies take on debt to pay those
attractive dividends.
So you need to do your homework.
But I would be very surprised if high dividend
equities, if income generating equities, won't
outperform growth equities over the next 10
to 20 years.
Another option is to look at style as another
factor.
Style is really growth versus value.
Growth has done spectacularly well against
value over the last many years.
As I expect a modest rise in interest rates
in years to come, value should outperform
growth.
So that's the first reason.
Second reason is that after many, many years
of underperformance, value is now extremely
attractively priced relative to growth.
And it is at the very low end of the range.
So for a retail investor, I would focus on
those two factors-- income and value.
For the more sophisticated investor, I would
look at other opportunities.
Is one of my favorite strategies is what I
call trade finance.
International trade is increasingly between
emerging markets and developed markets.
And because of restrictions put on commercial
banks, commercial banks are increasingly finding
it difficult to finance that international
trade.
And that has inspired a whole new industry
to pop up in the underforest of the alternative
investment would called trade finance.
The credit risk you take in trade finance
is not overly dramatic, but you still get
very attractive returns.
Returns are on average, 5%, 6%, 7%, 8%, depending
on which part of the world you look at.
And you can typically access your capital
in a few months' time.
If you're prepared to go further out that
curve, out the liquidity curve, and lock up
your capital seven years-- you can get even
higher returns.
One of my favorite traits further out the
curve is aviation leasing.
Basically, leasing commercial aircraft to
airlines around the world.
Given the growing living standards in Asia,
more and more Asians travel by plane and more
and more airlines around the world choose
to lease aircraft rather than buying them.
And the reason for that is very simple.
Commercial airlines need not to tie up too
much of their working capital.
And buying the aircraft ties up a huge amount
of working capital.
And therefore, commercial airlines increasingly
lease rather than buy.
When I first joined this industry back in
the mid '80s, only 3% to 4% of commercial
aircraft were leased.
The rest were bought.
Today it's about 35% of all commercial aircraft
that are leased, and that is a-- it's a trend
that benefits from the end of the debt super
cycle.
It's a trend that benefits from the rise of
the East.
And you can get some very attractive returns.
But the negative is that you need to tie up
your capital for five, six, seven years.
There is one risk that should never be underestimated,
and I learned this in 2008.
I learned it the hard way, because I got burned
myself.
When the S... hits the fan, the worst thing
you can be in terms of your portfolio construction
is that your duration of your assets is shorter
than the duration of your liabilities.
In other words, you have a mismatch between
assets and liabilities.
In other words, if a trade finance fund's
offers quarterly liquidity to investors but
the underlying loan book is tied up for at
least six months, then as long as times are
good, as long as everything is hunky dory,
he can meet his redemption request.
Because there's always money coming in that
he can use to pay the money going out.
But that day we run into the problems we have
talked about today, the day that and we suddenly
have to hit the brakes-- then I can guarantee
you there would be more redemptions than incoming
investors.
And when that happens, you don't want to have
a mismatch between assets, and liabilities.
And therefore, I cannot warn investors strongly
enough about this risk.
I learned in 2008 that this is the easiest
way to lose your shirt in these markets--
if there is a mismatch.
And therefore, only invest in things that
are properly matched when it comes to assets
and liabilities.
The problem we have today is that investors
think that the sort of returns we have delivered
or we have received since the start of the
great bull market is sort of the norm.
And that's what we should expect going forward.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
So rule number one if we don't want to disappoint
ourselves, is be realistic.
Look at the long-term.
Look at what sort of returns have equities
delivered over the long-term, and not just
in the last 35 years, that have been extraordinarily
benign for global equities.
Secondly, construct your portfolio with the
little twists and tweaks that we have talked
about today.
If you do that, I think you can do more than
2% to 3% per annum.
You can probably do 5%, 6%, 7% per annum.
And that should be enough not to make you
too depressed.